>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 18:
COUNTER-TERRORISM OFFICIALS LOOK
FOR CLUES ABOUT THE EXPLOSIVE
SET OFF IN A GARBAGE DUMPSTER IN
MANHATTAN LAST NIGHT...
A MAN STABS EIGHT PEOPLE INSIDE
A MINNESOTA MALL, AND NOW ISIS
CLAIMS HIM AS A SOLDIER OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
AND, IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
NEW TECHNOLOGY TO HELP DOCTORS
IDENTIFY WHEN SOMEONE MAY BE
SUICIDAL.
>> IT PREDICTS BETTER THAN A
PERSON'S OWN REPORT OF WHETHER
THEY'RE GOING TO MAKE A SUICIDE
ATTEMPT.
IT PREDICTS BETTER THAN
CLINICIAN'S REPORTS.
>> Stewart: NEXT ON "PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALLISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
NEW YORK GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO
SAYS NEW YORK CITY WAS "LUCKY"
THERE WERE NO FATALITIES CAUSED
BY LAST NIGHT'S EXPLOSION IN OR
NEAR A DUMPSTER ON A MANHATTAN
STREET.
A SECOND, UNEXPLODED DEVICE
FOUND IN A PLASTIC BAG FOUR
BLOCKS AWAY WAS "SIMILAR IN
DESIGN" AND IS BEING EXAMINED AT
F.B.I. HEADQUARTERS IN QUANTICO,
VIRGINIA, ALONG WITH REMNANTS OF
THE FIRST DEVICE.
SHRAPNEL AND FLYING DEBRIS FROM
THE EXPLOSION HURT MORE THAN
TWO DOZEN PEOPLE, ALL TREATED
AND RELEASED FROM LOCAL
HOSPITALS.
EVIDENCE RECOVERY TEAMS WORKED
THE SCENE ALL DAY TODAY.
THE EXPLOSION SHATTERED WINDOWS
BUT DID NOT CAUSE ANY STRUCTURAL
DAMAGE TO BUILDINGS OR SUBWAY
STATIONS.
GOVERNOR CUOMO SAID
INVESTIGATORS HAVE NOT
DISCOVERED ANY LINKS BETWEEN THE
ATTACK AND ANY KNOWN
INTERNATIONAL TERRORIST GROUP.
NEW YORK CITY MAYOR BILL DE
BLASIO AND N.Y.P.D. COMMISSIONER
JAMES O'NEILL TOLD REPORTERS
TODAY THE BLAST WAS INTENTIONAL,
BUT THE MOTIVATION IS UNKNOWN.
>> WE'RE IN THE PROCESS OF A
COMPLEX INVESTIGATION TO
DETERMINE WHO DID THIS AND WHY
THEY DID THIS.
>> Stewart: THE MAYOR ALSO SAID
POLICE PRESENCE IN MANHATTAN
WILL BE STRONGER THAN USUAL THIS
WEEK, AS THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY GETS UNDERWAY.
INVESTIGATORS ARE LOOKING INTO
WHETHER THE MANHATTAN INCIDENT
WAS CONNECTED TO THE PIPE BOMB
THAT EXPLODED YESTERDAY MORNING
IN THE NEW JERSEY SHORE TOWN OF
SEASIDE PARK, ABOUT AN HOUR-AND-
HALF AWAY.
THE NEW JERSEY BOMB DETONATED
INSIDE A GARBAGE CAN ALONG THE
ROUTE OF FIVE-KILOMETER RACE
MEANT TO RAISE MONEY FOR U.S.
MARINES.
NO ONE WAS HURT, AND THE RACE
WAS CANCELLED.
>> Stewart: THE F.B.I. IN
MINNESOTA SAYS IT IS
INVESTIGATING LAST NIGHT'S
STABBING SPREE AT A SHOPPING
MALL AN HOUR FROM MINNEAPOLIS AS
A POTENTIAL ACT OF TERRORISM.
BUT IN A STATEMENT, THE ISLAMIC
STATE, OR ISIS, CLAIMED THE
ASSAILANT WAS ONE OF ITS
SOLDIERS.
POLICE IN ST. CLOUD, MINNESOTA,
SAY THE MAN, WHO WAS WEARING A
PRIVATE SECURITY GUARD UNIFORM
STABBED NINE PEOPLE.
AUTHORITIES SAY THE ATTACKER
MADE AT LEAST ONE REFERENCE TO
ALLAH AND ASKED ONE VICTIM IF
HE WAS MUSLIM.
AN OFF DUTY POLICE OFFICER IN
THE MALL SHOT AND KILLED THE
MAN.
NONE OF THE WOUNDS INFLICTED BY
THE ASSAILANT WERE LIFE-
THREATENING.
SIX STABBING VICTIMS WERE
TREATED AND RELEASED FROM
HOSPITALS.
THE MALL IS CLOSED UNTIL
TOMORROW.
THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY IN TULSA,
OKLAHOMA, IS INVESTIGATING
WHETHER A POLICE-INVOLVED FATAL
SHOOTING OF A BLACK MOTORIST
FRIDAY NIGHT WAS JUSTIFIED.
THE SISTER OF THE MAN WHO WAS
SHOT, 40-YEAR OLD TIFFANY
CRUTCHER, SAYS HER BROTHER WAS
NOT ARMED, AND SHE WANTS TO SEE
ANY POLICE DASHBOARD CAMERA
VIDEO OF THE INCIDENT.
POLICE SAY CRUTCHER REFUSED TO
FOLLOW COMMANDS GIVEN BY
OFFICERS-- INCLUDING TO PUT HIS
HANDS UP-- AS THEY APPROACHED
HIS STALLED S.U.V. IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE STREET.
TULSA POLICE HAVE NOT SAID IF A
WEAPON WAS FOUND BUT INTEND TO
RELEASE ANY AVAILABLE VIDEOS
TOMORROW.
REPUBLICAN VICE PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE MIKE PENCE SAID TODAY
THAT DONALD TRUMP'S COMMENTS AT
A RALLY FRIDAY NIGHT-- THAT
HILLARY CLINTON'S SECRET SERVICE
AGENTS SHOULD DISARM-- WERE
NOT MEANT TO THREATEN OR
ENCOURAGE VIOLENCE AGAINST THE
DEMOCRATIC NOMINEE.
>> THAT'S ABSOLUTE NONSENSE. HIS
COMMENT WAS THAT IF SHE DIDN'T
HAVE ALL THAT SECURITY SHE WOULD
CHANGE HER ATTITUDE ABOUT THE
RIGHT TO KEEP AND BEAR ARMS.
AND I'LL BET THAT'S PROBABLY
TRUE.
>> Stewart: IN MIAMI FRIDAY,
TRUMP SAID CLINTON'S"
BODYGUARDS...SHOULD DROP ALL
WEAPONS" AND THEN, HE SAID,"
LET'S SEE WHAT HAPPENS TO HER."
AT THE CONGRESSIONAL BLACK
CAUCUS FOUNDATION DINNER IN
WASHINGTON LAST NIGHT, PRESIDENT
OBAMA SAID THE BEST SEND-OFF FOR
HIM AND THE FIRST LADY WOULD BE
A STRONG AFRICAN-AMERICAN
TURNOUT ON ELECTION DAY FOR HIS
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE.
>> AFTER WE HAVE ACHIEVED THAT
HISTORIC TURNOUT IN 2008 AND
2012, ESPECIALLY IN THE AFRICAN-
AMERICAN COMMUNITY, I WILL
CONSIDER IT A PERSONAL INSULT,
AN INSULT TO MY LEGACY, IF THIS
COMMUNITY LETS DOWN ITS GUARD
AND FAILS TO ACTIVATE ITSELF IN
THIS ELECTION.
HEAR ABOUT ARAB-AMERICAN
STUDENTS WHO ARE GROWING UP IN A
POST-9/11 CLIMATE.
VISIT US AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: THE PRICE OF A
GALLON OF GAS IS EXPECTED TO GO
UP THIS WEEK ALONG THE EAST
COAST, DUE TO A LEAKY GAS
PIPELINE IN ALABAMA.
THE PIPELINE DELIVERS MORE THAN
A MILLION BARRELS OF GASOLINE
EVERY DAY FROM GULF COAST
REFINERIES TO STATES FROM
MISSISSIPPI TO NEW JERSEY.
COLONIAL PIPELINE, WHICH OWNS
THE PIPELINE, ANNOUNCED
YESTERDAY IT WILL CONSTRUCT A
TEMPORARY FIX.
JOINING ME NOW FROM HOUSTON TO
DISCUSS THE LEAK AND ITS IMPACT
IS "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REPORTER ALISON SIDER.
THIS LEAK WAS DISCOVERED
DURING A ROUTINE INSPECTION ON
SEPTEMBER 9th YET THE
EXCAVATION AND WORK DIDN'T
REALLY GET STARTED UNTIL LAST
FRIDAY.
WHAT HAPPENED IN BETWEEN?
>> SO YEAH, ONE OF THE PROBLEMS
THEY'VE HAD IS THAT A LOT OF THE
GASOLINE IN THE PIPELINE SORT OF
POOLED IN THESE MANMADE PONDS.
AND THAT'S LEAD TO HIGH
CONCENTRATIONS OF VAPORS THAT
HAVE MADE IT DIFFICULT FOR
WORKERS TO WORK IN THE AREA, FOR
A SUSTAINED PERIOD.
SO ON FRIDAY AFTERNOON THEY
BEGAN THE EXCAVATION, FINALLY,
BUT IT'S ALL TAKEN LONGER THAN
ANTICIPATED.
>> THERE HAVE BEEN RULES WAIVED
BY CERTAIN AGENCIES TO SORT OF
DEAL WITH POTENTIAL DOMINO
EFFECT.
TELL US A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
THAT.
>> SURE.
SO THE EPA HAS WAIVED CERTAIN
SEG RAISE-- REGULATIONS, THE
ATTEMPT IS TO ALLOW MORE
GASOLINE TO COME TO THE AREA TO
BE SOLD TO PREVENT SHORTAGES.
SEVERAL SOUTH EASTERN STATES
GOVERNORS HAVE ISSUED EXECUTIVE
ORDERS THAT ARE ALSO AIMED AT
INCREASING THE AMOUNT OF
GASOLINE IN THE REGION.
SO WAIVING REGULATIONS
TEMPORARILY THAT WOULD PREVENT
TRUCKERS FROM DRIVING LONG
ENOUGH HOURS TO MAKE IT.
SO THE INTENT IS REALLY TO MAKE
SURE THAT GASOLINE CAN COME
FROM-- SOMETIMES FROM LONG
DISTANCES IN ORDER TO MAKE SURE
THAT THERE AREN'T SHORTAGES.
>> HAVE ANY ENVIRONMENTAL
CONCERNS BEEN ADDRESSED YET?
>> SO THE PIPELINE OF HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS SAFETY, THE FEDERAL
AGENCY THAT REGULATES
PIPELINES, THEY ISSUED A
CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER ON
FRIDAY.
IT WILL REQUIRE THE PIPELINE
COMPANY TO TAKE CERTAIN STEPS
BEFORE RESTARTING THE PIPELINES,
REALLY BECAUSE OF THE ISSUES WE
DISCUSSED EARLIER WITH THE
VAPORS, THEY ARE WORKING NOW TO
EXCAVATE THE PIPELINE AND IT
WON'T BE UNTIL THEN THAT THEY
REALLY KNOW WHAT HAPPENED.
IN THE MEAN TIME IT SEEMS THAT
THE GASOLINE HAS REALLY POOLED
IN THESE MANNED MADE PONDS AND
LUCKILY I'M BEING TOLD IT HASN'T
ESCAPED THOSE PONDS AND FLOWED
INTO LOCAL RIVERS.
>> AND WE TALKED ABOUT A
TEMPORARY FIX, WHAT WILL THAT BE
AND HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE TO GET
THIS PIPELINE BACK UP AND
RUNNING.
>> THE FIX THAT THE COMPANY IS
PROPOSING IS TO BUILD SORT OF A
BYPASS PIPELINE THE SAME SIZE
THE ORIGINAL AND JUST GO AROUND
THE AREA THAT BROKE.
SO THAT HOPEFULLY THAT WILL HELP
THEM GET IT UP AND RUNNING AGAIN
MORE QUICKLY.
THE COMPANY HAS SAID THEY ARE
AIMING TO GET IT RESTARTED THIS
WEEK, THOUGH THEY HAVEN'T PUT AN
EXACT DATE ON IT YET AND OF
COURSE THE LONGER THE PIPELINE
REMAINS OUT OF COMMISSION, THE
GREATER THE IMPACT WILL BE.
>> AS WE STARTED THIS WE
DESCRIBED THIS HAPPENING ON A
ROUTINE INSPECTION.
DOES ANYONE KNOW WHY IT LEAKED
IN THE FIRST PLACE?
>> NO, I DON'T THINK THAT IS
KNOWN YET; ONCE THEY ARE ABLE
TO EXCAVATE THE PIPELINE THEY
WILL BE ABLE TO GET A CLOSER
LOOK AT THE METAL AND UNDERSTAND
WHAT WENT WRONG AND PERFORM
CERTAIN TESTS.
BUT BECAUSE OF THE VAPOR IN THE
AREA, IT'S BEEN HARD FOR THEM TO
HAVE WORKER THERE ON A
SUSTAINED, OVER SUSTAINED
PERIODS.
THEY HAVE BEEN WORKING
INTERMITTENTLY TO DO THAT.
>> ALISON SIDER FROM "THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Stewart: SEPTEMBER IS
NATIONAL SUICIDE PREVENTION
AWARENESS MONTH.
THE SUICIDE RATE IN THE UNITED
STATES IS ON THE RISE AND HAS
BEEN FOR THE PAST 15 YEARS.
ON AVERAGE, THERE ARE 117
SUICIDES IN THE U.S. EVERY DAY
AND AN ESTIMATED 25 ATTEMPTS.
IN AN EFFORT TO ADDRESS THE
PROBLEM SOME SCIENTISTS AND
MEDICAL PROFESSIONALS ARE USING
ADVANCES IN TECHNOLOGY TO HELP
PREDICT AND POSSIBLY PREVENT
SUICIDE.
>> YEAR AFTER YEAR AFTER YEAR...
>> Reporter: IN NEW YORK CITY
THIS SUMMER, MORE THAN TWO
THOUSAND PEOPLE GATHERED FOR THE
BIANNUAL "OUT OF THE DARKNESS"
OVERNIGHT WALK.
IT COVERS 16 MILES FROM DUSK TO
DAWN, IN MEMORY OF THOSE WHO
HAVE DIED FROM SUICIDE.
ROSEMARY FUSS TRAVELED FROM
BOSTON.
IT'S THE TENTH TIME SHE'S WALKED
FOR HER SON, TOMMY.
>> WE ARE PART OF A FAMILY.
WE ARE SURVIVORS.
AND, WE ARE COMMITTED TO SAVING
OTHER PRECIOUS LIVES.
WE CAN'T BRING OUR LOVED ONES
BACK, BUT WE CAN CERTAINLY DO
SOMETHING TO HELP OTHERS.
>> Reporter: THE EVENT RAISES
AWARENESS AND MONEY TO RESEARCH
SUICIDE PREVENTION.
SUICIDE DEATHS IN THE UNITED
STATES ROSE FROM 29,000 PEOPLE
IN 1999, TO NEARLY 43,000 IN
2014.
AND THE OVERALL SUICIDE RATE
BETWEEN THOSE YEARS IS UP 24
PERCENT.
SUICIDE IS NOW THE NATION'S 10TH
LEADING CAUSE OF THE DEATH, AND
THE SECOND LEADING CAUSE FOR
YOUNG PEOPLE BETWEEN TEN AND 24
YEARS OLD, LIKE TOMMY FUSS.
>> HE WAS A 17-YEAR-OLD KID WHO
PRESENTED HIMSELF IN A
CONFIDENT, INDEPENDENT WAY.
A KID WHO HAD EVERYTHING TO LIVE
FOR.
>> Reporter: AT WHAT POINT IN
THIS PROCESS, IN YOUR JOURNEY,
DID YOU REALIZE THAT TOMMY WAS
STRUGGLING?
>> IT'S HARD TO KNOW WHAT IS A
STRUGGLE THAT IS ASSOCIATED WITH
A MENTAL ILLNESS AND WHAT'S THE
NORMAL ADOLESCENT FINDING HIS
OWN SELF.
WE DID RECEIVE A CALL FROM
SOMEONE AT THE SCHOOL WHO SAID,"
YOU KNOW, MAYBE TOMMY SHOULD
SEE SOMEONE, TALK TO SOMEONE, I
THINK TOMMY IS DEPRESSED."
MY HUSBAND AND MY FIRST REACTION
WAS, TOMMY? DEPRESSED?
YOU'VE GOT TO BE KIDDING.
YOU CAN SEE THE HAPPY, THE
CHILD, AND YOU CAN SEE A REAL
SOMBER...
>> Reporter: TOMMY DID SEE A
THERAPIST, BUT NO SERIOUS
ISSUES WERE REVEALED.
A COUPLE OF MONTHS LATER,
ROSEMARY FOUND HER SON'S SUICIDE
PLAN.
IT WAS FOILED AND TOMMY SPENT
ONE NIGHT IN A HOSPITAL.
>> THE PSYCHIATRIST AND OTHERS
THOUGHT GET HIM BACK INTO HIS
FUNCTIONING ENVIRONMENT, WE'LL
TREAT HIM AS AN OUTPATIENT.
BUT TOMMY DID NOT SHARE HIS
INNER SELF.
>> Reporter: TWO MONTHS LATER,
TOMMY TURNED ON HIS FAMILY'S
CAR, LEFT THE ENGINE RUNNING
INSIDE THE GARAGE, AND KILLED
HIMSELF BY CARBON MONOXIDE
POISONING.
>> WE DON'T HAVE ANY WAY
PARTICULARLY OF KNOWING WHAT A
PERSON'S THOUGHTS OR PLANNED
ACTIONS ARE GOING TO BE.
>> Reporter: DOCTOR JEFF HUFFMAN
IS THE DIRECTOR OF INPATIENT
PSYCHIATRY AT MASSACHUSETTS
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
HE WAS NOT INVOLVED IN TOMMY'S
CARE.
>> DURING OUR TRAINING, A LOT OF
THE FOCUS ON ASSESSING PEOPLE'S
SUICIDE WAS ASKING PEOPLE
DIRECTLY BUT ALSO KIND OF USING
YOUR QUOTE UNQUOTE CLINICAL
JUDGEMENT.
AND THERE WAS A SENSE THAT AS
YOU GREW AS A PSYCHIATRIST, YOU
WOULD JUST KNOW THAT SOMEBODY IS
AT RISK OR NOT AT RISK.
>> Reporter: BUT STUDIES, LIKE
THIS ONE FROM THE JOURNAL OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE, SHOW
CLINICIANS HAVE ABOUT A 50/50
CHANCE-- NO BETTER THAN A COIN
TOSS-- OF PREDICTING WHO WILL
ATTEMPT SUICIDE.
THERE ARE CERTAIN GROUPS WITH
HIGHER RISK FOR SUICIDE:
LIKE PEOPLE WITH MEDICAL
CONDITIONS; MENTAL AND SUBSTANCE
USE DISORDERS; OR MILITARY
VETERANS.
BUT, IT'S DIFFICULT TO NARROW
DOWN WHO OF THE MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE IN THOSE HIGH RISK GROUPS
WILL TRY TO KILL THEMSELVES.
AND THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO DON'T
FALL INTO THOSE GROUPS WHO MAY
ALSO ATTEMPT SUICIDE.
>> SO WE HAVE THIS GROWING LIST
OF RISK FACTORS.
WHERE WE'RE LIMITED IS IN OUR
ABILITY TO PUT THEM TOGETHER IN
A WAY THAT CAN TELL US WHICH
PEOPLE ARE AT GREATEST RISK.
>> Reporter: DOCTOR MATTHEW NOCK
IS A LEADING SUICIDE RESEARCHER
AND PROFESSOR AT HARVARD
UNIVERSITY.
HE IS DEVELOPING NEW DIAGNOSTIC
TOOLS USING TECHNOLOGY AND
ADVANCES IN SCIENCE.
WHAT DOES TECHNOLOGY OFFER IN
THIS FIELD THAT TRADITIONAL
METHODS OF DIAGNOSIS DOESN'T
ALLOW FOR?
>> Reporter: TRADITIONALLY, IF
SOMEONE WAS SUICIDAL OUT IN THE
WORLD, WE WOULD WAIT FOR THEM TO
COME INTO OUR OFFICE OR INTO OUR
LAB AND TELL US THEIR SUICIDAL
AND WE'D ASK THEM ABOUT WHAT
THEIR EXPERIENCE WAS LIKE.
BUT NOW WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES,
WE CAN TAKE THE LAB AND BRING IT
TO THE PERSON.
>> Reporter: IN ONE STUDY AT
MASS GENERAL, NOCK IS USING
REAL-TIME MONITORING TO TRY AND
PREDICT SUICIDAL THOUGHTS AND
BEHAVIORS.
HE HAS PATIENTS RESPOND
THROUGHOUT THE DAY TO QUESTIONS
ON A SMARTPHONE.
LIKE HOW NERVOUS OR ABANDONED
HAVE YOU FELT IN THE PAST 24
HOURS?
OR HOW MANY HOURS DID YOU SLEEP
LAST NIGHT?
PATIENTS ALSO WEAR BRACELETS
THAT COLLECT "BIOMARKERS"--
THEIR PHYSICAL INFORMATION--
LIKE SWEAT, SKIN TEMPERATURE,
AND HEART RATE.
WHEN A PATIENT FEELS SUICIDAL,
HE OR SHE PRESSES A BUTTON ON
THE BRACELET.
>> WE CAN THEN LOOK BACK, ARE
THERE CERTAIN TYPES OF
EXPERIENCES OR PATTERNS OR
SIGNATURES THAT TELL US WHEN
THOSE BUTTON PRESSES ARE GOING
TO OCCUR.
SO CAN WE GET BETTER AT
IDENTIFYING WHEN A PERSON IS AT
RISK.
>> Reporter: SAM BAMFORD HAS HAD
SUICIDAL THOUGHTS SINCE HIGH
SCHOOL.
HE'S NOW 34 YEARS OLD AND HAS
HUNTINGTON'S, THE DEGENERATIVE
BRAIN DISEASE WITH NO CURE.
HE SAYS HE'S BEEN HOSPITALIZED
TWICE FOR SUICIDAL THOUGHTS.
WE MET HIM AFTER HE CAME TO MASS
GENERAL, FOLLOWING A SUICIDE
ATTEMPT THAT HE SAYS CAME OUT
OF NOWHERE.
>> THE FIRST HOSPITALIZATION WAS
ALL NONSTOP THOUGHTS ABOUT IT.
MONTHS OF IT.
AND THEN THIS TIME AROUND,
EVERYTHING WAS GOING GREAT.
I HAD AN AWESOME NIGHT, HUNG OUT
WITH SOME REALLY GREAT FRIENDS
THAT ARE SUPER SUPPORTIVE; IT
WAS JUST REALLY STRANGE.
>> Reporter: SO THIS CRISIS WAS
ONE OF IMPULSE.
>> YEAH, IT CAME OUT OF THE
BLUE.
>> Reporter: AFTER ARRIVING IN
THE E.R., BAMFORD TOOK WHAT'S
CALLED AN IMPLICIT ASSOCIATION
TEST, OR I.A.T.
I.A.T.s ARE OFTEN USED TO
EXAMINE RACIAL OR GENDER BIAS.
NOCK HAS DESIGNED THIS I.A.T. TO
ANALYZE SUBCONSCIOUS THOUGHTS
ASSOCIATED WITH SUICIDE.
TO SEE HOW IT WORKS, I TOOK THE
15 MINUTE TEST.
I WAS INSTRUCTED TO READ A WORD
FLASHING ON THE SCREEN, AND
PLACE IT EITHER IN THE ME OR NOT
ME COLUMN.
SOME WORDS WERE SUICIDE RELATED,
SUCH AS DEATH OR FUNERAL.
SOME WORDS WERE LIFE AFFIRMING,
SUCH AS BREATHE OR LIVING.
TO GET THE SUBJECTS UNFILTERED
THOUGHTS, THERE'S ONLY A
FRACTION OF A SECOND TO RESPOND.
IT WAS TOUGH.
IT WAS TOUGH, I COULDN'T PUT
MYSELF AND DEATH NEXT TO EACH
OTHER.
>> EXACTLY THE IDEA.
AND WHAT WE FOUND IS THAT PEOPLE
WHO ARE SUICIDAL ARE FASTER THAN
THOSE WHO ARE NOT SUICIDAL
PAIRING DEATH AND ME ON THE SAME
SIDE, CAUSE THEY IDENTIFY WITH
DEATH OR SUICIDE.
AND SO WE WANT TO COMPARE ONE
SET OF REACTION TIMES TO THE
OTHER IN MILLISECONDS
>> Reporter: NOCK IS STILL
WORKING ON MAKING THE TEST MORE
ACCURATE, BUT SAYS HE'S ALREADY
SEEN STRONG RESULTS FROM THE
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE
TAKEN IT.
>> IT PREDICTS BETTER THAN A
PERSON'S OWN REPORT OF WHETHER
THEY'RE GOING TO MAKE A SUICIDE
ATTEMPT.
IT PREDICTS BETTER THAN
CLINICIANS' REPORTS.
>> Reporter: NOCK SAYS MOST
PATIENTS ARE OPEN TO INTERACTING
WITH TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS...
AND SOME EVEN SAY IT'S
PREFERABLE.
>> THERE'S ACTUALLY PARTS OF ME-
- PARTS OF ME THAT WISH SOME OF
THIS STUFF WAS ALREADY SHARED
WITH MY DOCTORS, BECAUSE I'D
JUST HAVE AN EASIER TIME
ANSWERING THE QUESTIONS WITH THE
PHONE THAN I WOULD WITH A ROOM
FULL OF PEOPLE.
>> SURE.
CAN BE EASIER THAT WAY, LESS
INTIMIDATING.
>> Reporter: AND JEFF HUFFMAN
SAYS THESE NEW TOOLS CAN ALSO
HELP DETERMINE WHO NEEDS TO BE
IN THIS PSYCHIATRIC UNIT, WHICH
LIKE SO MANY ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
HAS A SMALL NUMBER OF BEDS
COMPARED TO THE NEED.
>> WE ALL SIT AND THINK AND
WORRY ABOUT OUR NEXT PATIENT WE
DISCHARGE ATTEMPTING SUICIDE OR
GOD FORBID, COMPLETING SUICIDE.
IF WE CAN DEVELOP TOOLS TO MAKE
US MORE CONFIDENT ABOUT PATIENTS
WHO ARE SAFE TO LEAVE, WE
DESPERATELY NEED THOSE, WE
DESPERATELY WANT THOSE.
>> Reporter: THESE TOOLS WERE
AMONG THE TECHNIQUES DISCUSSED
AT A SUICIDE CONFERENCE HOSTED
BY THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF
MENTAL HEALTH IN JUNE.
ALL OF THESE RESEARCHERS ARE
LOOKING FOR INNOVATIVE WAYS TO
MORE PRECISELY PREDICT SUICIDE
RISK AND TO DIAGNOSE AND TREAT
MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS.
DOCTOR DANIEL DICKSTEIN IS A
CHILD PSYCHIATRIST AND ASSOCIATE
DIRECTOR OF RESEARCH AT BRADLEY
HOSPITAL IN PROVIDENCE, RHODE
ISLAND.
HE STUDIES BIPOLAR DISORDER, A
MENTAL ILLNESS CHARACTERIZED BY
MOOD SWINGS RANGING FROM
DEPRESSIVE LOWS TO MANIC HIGHS.
>> BIPOLAR DISORDER, OF ALL
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS, INVOLVES
THE HIGHEST RATES OF SUICIDE.
SO ABOUT 50 PERCENT OF KIDS WHO
HAVE BIPOLAR DISORDER THINK
ABOUT KILLING THEMSELVES AT
LEAST ONCE, AND ABOUT 30 PERCENT
OF KIDS WITH BIPOLAR DISORDER
ACTUALLY TRY TO KILL THEMSELVES,
AGAIN, AT LEAST ONCE.
>> Reporter: 15-YEAR-OLD MASON
IS BIPOLAR, AND IS A PARTICIPANT
IN DICKSTEIN'S RESEARCH STUDY.
HIS MOTHER, JESSICA, FELT MORE
COMFORTABLE TALKING TO US ABOUT
HER SON'S ILLNESS WITH HER FACE
OBSCURED.
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU HEARD,"
JESSICA, YOUR SON HAS BIPOLAR
DISORDER," WHAT DID YOU THINK?
>> IT'S JUST REALLY HARD TO
HEAR.
YOU WANT AN EASY LIFE FOR YOUR
KID.
YOU DON'T WANT ANYTHING TO MAKE
IT HARD FOR HIM.
AND I KNEW NOTHING ABOUT
BIPOLAR.
I KNEW NOTHING ABOUT WHAT HE WAS
DIAGNOSED WITH.
SO IT WAS SCARY.
>> Reporter: DID MASON EVER POSE
HARM TO HIMSELF?
>> WHEN HE WAS ABOUT NINE, HE
HAD ABOUT A TWO HOUR LONG RAGE
FIT THAT WE COULDN'T CONTROL
ANYMORE.
AND HE WAS IN THE KITCHEN BY THE
KNIVES, AND HE JUST SAID HE WAS
GOING TO KILL HIMSELF, AND HE
KEPT SAYING IT.
>> Reporter: YOU TOOK HIM TO THE
HOSPITAL.
>> YES, WE TOOK HIM TO THE
WE WERE THERE OVERNIGHT.
AND THEN AT 3 IN THE MORNING,
THEY WOKE HIM UP, DID A PSYCH
EVAL AND SENT US HOME AN HOUR
LATER.
>> IT'S MAKING APPROXIMATELY
30 PICTURES MEASURING BRAIN
ACTIVITY.
>> Reporter: DICKSTEIN
SAYS CHILDREN WITH BIPOLAR
DISORDER HAVE CERTAIN
IRREGULARITIES IN BRAIN
ACTIVITY-- ONE IS AN IMPAIRED
ABILITY TO QUICKLY ADAPT TO
CHANGING SITUATIONS. SO HE'S
DESIGNED A SPACE-THEMED VIDEO
GAME THAT, HE HYPOTHESIZES, WILL
"RETRAIN THE BRAIN" AND IMPROVE
THOSE SKILLS. >> PERIODICALLY
THROUGHOUT THE GAME, THEY HAVE
TO ADAPT THEIR BEHAVIOR TO
FIGURE OUT A DECISION POINT.
AND THEY HAVE TO LEARN FROM
THEIR PRIOR DECISIONS AS THEY'RE
FLYING THROUGH.
AND THAT'S SORT OF THE HEART OF
THE GAME.
THEIR INITIAL CHOICE ONCE THEY
FIGURE OUT THE RIGHT MOVE MAY
WORK FOR A WHILE, BUT AFTER A
WHILE IT CHANGES WITHOUT
WARNING.
>> Reporter: PARTICIPANTS IN THE
STUDY PLAY THE GAME TWICE A WEEK
FOR EIGHT WEEKS.
THEN DICKSTEIN MEASURES THEIR
BRAIN ACTIVITY WITH AN M.R.I.
WHILE THEY PLAY A VERSION OF THE
GAME.
IF THE SCAN LOOKS MORE LIKE THAT
OF A HEALTHY CHILD AFTER THE
EIGHT WEEKS, THE BRAIN
RETRAINING MAY BE WORKING.
DICKSTEIN SAYS EARLY RESULTS ARE
PROMISING BUT MUCH MORE TESTING
IS NEEDED.
HE SAYS, IF IT WORKS, IT COULD
BE SCALED UP QUICKLY AND HELP
THOUSANDS OF CHILDREN.
WHY HASN'T THIS KIND OF RESEARCH
BEEN DONE BEFORE?
>> IT'S HARDER AND HARDER TO GET
FUNDING.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST SEVERAL
YEARS, LARGE AMOUNTS OF FEDERAL
FUNDING HAVE BEEN PUT TOWARD
RESEARCHING CAUSES OF DEATH LIKE
HIV, HEART DISEASE AND VARIOUS
CANCERS. MORTALITY RATES IN ALL
THOSE AREAS HAVE DRAMATICALLY
DECREASED.
EVEN AS SUICIDE DEATHS CONTINUE
TO RISE, SUICIDE RESEARCH GETS
SIGNIFICANTLY LESS FUNDING.
DICKSTEIN IS AMONG MANY EXPERTS
WHO BELIEVE THAT, IF SUICIDE
RESEARCH WAS BETTER FUNDED, THE
EPIDEMIC WOULD ALSO SLOW.
HE SAYS PEOPLE NEED TO
PRIORITIZE SUICIDE AND MENTAL
HEALTH RESEARCH, IN THE SAME WAY
THEY DID FOR CHILDHOOD CANCER.
>> WHEREAS BEFORE UP TO THE'
80s, IT WAS AN ABSOLUTE DEATH
SENTENCE.
NOW, THE FIVE-YEAR SURVIVAL FOR
CHILDHOOD LEUKEMIA IS OVER 90,
95 PERCENT.
PATIENTS, PARENTS, CLINICIANS,
RESEARCHERS AND FUNDERS GOT
TOGETHER AND SAID, "ENOUGH OF
OUR KIDS DYING OF CANCER."
EVERY KID WHO HAS CANCER IS NOW
GOING TO BE PART OF RESEARCH.
THAT'S REALLY WHAT I'M TRYING TO
DO FOR BIPOLAR DISORDER AND
RELATED CONDITIONS LIKE SUICIDE.
>> IF TODAY MASON PLAYING GAMES
HELPS A KID TEN YEARS FROM NOW,
THEN IT WAS WORTH IT, BECAUSE
THAT'S SOMEBODY WE HELPED.
WHEN YOU'RE LOOKING FOR ANSWERS
AND YOU DON'T KNOW WHERE TO
TURN, YOU NEED HELP.
>> Reporter: IT'S 2:00 A.M., AND
ROSEMARY FUSS AND HER ELDEST
SON, DANNY, ARE STILL WALKING.
>> EVERYBODY IS AT A MUCH SLOWER
PACE RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: THEIR TEAM IS
COMMITTED TO HELPING MOMS LIKE
JESSICA, BY REMOVING THE STIGMA
ATTACHED TO SUICIDE, AND
SUPPORTING RESEARCH FOR THE
TECHNOLOGICAL TOOLS THAT,
ROSEMARY BELIEVES, WOULD HAVE
HELPED HER SON.
>> THEY WOULD HAVE GIVEN
CARETAKERS MORE INFORMATION.
THE INFORMATION THAT TOMMY
WASN'T WILLING TO SHARE WITH
THEM FACE TO FACE.
NOTHING WOULD BRING TOMMY BACK,
BUT WE COULD HELP OTHERS.
IT'S A FEELING OF, YOU KNOW, WE
ARE MAKING A DIFFERENCE."
DANNY, I LOVE YOU.
I LOVE YOU VERY, VERY MUCH."
>> Stewart: THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTES OF MENTAL HEALTH
POINTS THOSE IN CRISIS OR THOSE
WHO KNOW SOMEONE IN CRISIS TO
SUICIDEPREVENTIONLIFELINE.org
AND THE PHONE NUMBER
800-273-TALK.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY.
>> Stewart: THE CEASEFIRE IN
SYRIA BROKERED BY THE UNITED
STATES AND RUSSIA, NOW IN ITS
SIXTH DAY, IS HANGING BY A
THREAD.
TODAY, SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
WARPLANES STRUCK REBEL-HELD
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE NORTHERN
CITY OF ALEPPO FOR THE FIRST
TIME SINCE THE CEASEFIRE WENT
INTO EFFECT.
RUSSIA SAYS THE TRUCE WAS
JEOPARDIZED YESTERDAY WHEN
WARPLANES FROM THE U.S. LED
COALITION ATTACKED SYRIAN ARMY
POSITIONS IN THE EASTERN CITY OF
DEIR AL-ZOR, WHICH IS SURROUNDED
BY ISIS MILITANTS.
SYRIA SAYS 83 OF ITS SOLDIERS
WERE KILLED IN WHAT IT CALLED
"DANGEROUS AND BLATANT
AGGRESSION."
IN A WRITTEN STATEMENT, THE
PENTAGON EXPRESSED "REGRET" FOR
THE UNINTENTIONAL "LOSS OF
LIFE."
IN A UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL EMERGENCY SESSION LAST
NIGHT, U.S. AMBASSADOR SAMANTHA
POWER OBJECTED TO RUSSIA'S
CONDEMNATION OF THE ATTACK AND
THE IMPLICATION THE U.S. MAY BE
COLLUDING WITH ISIS.
IN TODAY'S ELECTIONS IN RUSSIA,
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN'S
RULING "UNITED RUSSIA PARTY" IS
ON TRACK TO INCREASE ITS
MAJORITY IN THE LOWER HOUSE OF
PARLIAMENT.
UNITED RUSSIA ALREADY CONTROLS
238 OF THE DUMA'S 450 SEATS.
AN ELECTION MONITORING GROUP HAS
RECEIVED 1,300 COMPLAINTS OF
VOTING VIOLATIONS.
THIS IS THE FIRST ELECTION TO
THE DUMA SINCE 2011, WHEN
ALLEGATIONS OF BALLOT-RIGGING
SPARKED MASSIVE ANTI-PUTIN
PROTESTS.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
IS HEADING FOR A SECOND ELECTION
DISAPPOINTMENT THIS MONTH,
STEMMING FROM THE BACKLASH OVER
HER DECISION TO ADMIT ONE
MILLION REFUGEES TO GERMANY LAST
YEAR.
PROJECTIONS HAVE MERKEL'S
CONSERVATIVE "CHRISTIAN
DEMOCRATS" LOSING SEATS IN
BERLIN'S ASSEMBLY TODAY TO THE
ANTI-IMMIGRANT "ALTERNATIVE FOR
GERMANY" PARTY.
THE CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATS RECEIVED
THEIR SMALLEST SHARE OF THE
BERLIN VOTE IN 26 YEARS AND WILL
LIKELY DROP OUT OF BERLIN'S
GOVERNING COALITION.
MERKEL'S PARTY FINISHED THIRD IN
VOTING IN HER HOME STATE TWO
WEEKS AGO.
>> Stewart: THE CALIFORNIA STATE
UNIVERSITY FINDS THE NUMBER OF
REPORTED HEALTH CRIMES AGAINST
MUSLIMS IN THE U.S. WENT UP 78
PERCENTS LAST YEAR.
THE STUDY RELEASED THIS WEEK END
AND BASED ON POLICE REPORTS IN
20 STATES SAYS THIS IS THE
SHARPEST RISE IN ANTI-MUSLIM
HATE CRIMES SINCE THE SEPTEMBER
119 TERRORIST ATTACKS.
HATE CRIMES AGAINST OTHER GROUPS
STAYED MOSTLY THE SAME EXCEPT
FOR TRANSGENDER PEOPLE, THOSE
WERE UP 40%.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR JUDY
WOODRUFF EXPLORES HOW AMERICAN
POLITICS IN THE WORDS OF
JONATHAN ROU CH HAVE GOTTEN SO
INSANE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.